To populate the
transition matrix,
you need to calculate
the probability of a
tagging happening,
given that's another
tag already happened.
You also need to calculate
the probability that
a tag happens at the
beginning of the sentence.
You will also learn
about a new concept
known as smoothing.
Let's get started.
Begin by filling
the first column of
your matrix with the counts
of the associated tags.
Remember, the rows in
the matrix represent
the current states and
the columns represent
the next states.
The values represents the
transition probabilities
of going from the current
state to the next state.
The states for this use case
is the parts of speech tag.
As you can see, the
defined tags and
the elements in the corpus are
marked with
corresponding colors.
For the first column,
you'll count the occurrences of
the following tag combinations.
As you see here,
a noun following a start token
occurs once in our corpus.
A noun following a noun
doesn't occur at all.
A noun following a verb
doesn't occur either.
A noun following another
tag occurs six times.
The rest of the matrix is
populated accordingly.
But I'll take it a
little shortcut.
The corpus, as you can see,
is a verbalize high cool,
because there are no
tag combinations with
the tag VB, they are all 0.
Unfortunately, there is
no such shortcuts in
the programming assignments.
You've been warned.
The 0 tag,
the O tag following a
start token occurs twice.
The O tag following a noun tag,
NN occurs six times,
and the last entry in the
transition matrix of an O tag,
following an O tag
has a count of eight.
In the last line, you
have to take into
account the tagged words on a,
a, wet, wet,
and, back to calculate
the correct counts.
Now, this you have calculated
the counts of all tag
combinations in the matrix,
you can calculate the
transition probabilities.
So far, you've calculated
then enter the counts
in the matrix,
which corresponds to the
numerator in our formula.
Now, you just have to divide
each counts by the sum,
which is actually the
corresponding row sum.
Remember what this
row sum represents.
For the row where
the current state
is a noun part of speech,
this sum across
that row represents
all pairs of words where the
current state is a noun,
and the next state is
any parts of speech,
whether it's a noun,
a verb, or other.
For the transition
probability of
a noun, tag NN
Following a start token,
or in other words,
the initial
probability of NN tag,
we divide one by three,
or four the transition
probability of
an other tag followed
by a noun tag,
we divide 6 by 14.
You may have realized that
there are two problems here.
One is that the row sum
of the VB tag is 0,
which would lead to a division
by 0 using this formula.
The other is that in lots of
entries in the
transition matrix are 0,
meaning that these transitions
will have probability 0.
This won't work if
you want the model to
generalize to other high cools,
which might actually
contain verbs.
To handle this, change
your formula slightly
by adding a small
value Epsilon to each
of the counts in the
numerator and add
N times Epsilon to
the divisor such that the row
sums still adds up to one.
This operation is also
referred to as smoothing,
which you might remember
from previous lessons.
If you substitute the
Epsilon with a small value,
say 0.001, then you'll
get the following
transition matrix.
The value shown here are
shown up to the third
decimal digits,
so don't worry, if
the row sums don't add
up to one exactly.
The results of smoothing
is, as you can see,
that you no longer have
any 0 value entries in a.
Further, since the transition
probabilities from
the VB states are actually
one-third for all
outgoing transitions,
they are equally likely.
That's reasonable.
Since you didn't have
any data to estimate these
transition probabilities.
One more thing before you go,
and a real-world example,
you might not want to
apply smoothing to
the initial probabilities in
the first row of the
transition matrix.
That's because if you apply
smoothing to that row by
adding a small value to
possibly zeroed valued entries.
You'll effectively allow
a sentence to start with
any parts of speech tag,
including punctuation.
You just learned about
smoothing and so
why it is important.
This is great.
Now in the next video,
we will move on and see
how you can populate
another type of matrix known
as the emissions matrix.